hello welcome to the second tum rocks
marsai extreme so this will be the same
as on last week if you hear if you
weren't the idea is I'm gonna start with
some questions that have already been
sent to me which are based on the
trouble graphs video that I released on
Monday for the Tom rocks mass appeal
GCSE high school level maths series that
we're doing so I'm gonna start with some
of those questions
we'll start off reasonably simple and
then we'll get on to more advanced
topics because they know they're the
most interesting they're the ones
they're the most sure we all do and then
after that there should be some time
left at the end for everyone to ask
questions in the live chat and then I'll
pick some of those and we'll talk
through some of those towards the end so
the whole thing will be about an hour
again similar to last week and we'll see
how it goes I've updated a few things so
I now have a microphone like attached to
me know if you can see it so hopefully
the sound will be a bit better and
hopefully the technology won't crash
halfway through which also happened last
time
so how BIG's it by saying this that so
let's kick off with a question so this
one came from
well this kind of game from two people
so Ryan asked could we could I talk
through some more of the graphs from
geogebra so if you don't know what I'm
on about you need to go and check the
description part of the video from one
day so the tom rocks marsupial video on
travel graphs in the description we gave
a link to a geogebra interactive
resource where you can plot travel
graphs and then it shows little cars
sort of acting out what the travel graph
is displaying so so Ryan asked me to do
some more of those so I'm going to take
some more examples from there and
obviously you should join in and do
these yourselves at home I'll tell you
which particular graph to click on which
number it is and then also David asked
me or asked those two the question was
how do you work out what is happening
from any given travel graph so if you
just get you know travel graph is thrown
in front of you how can you actually see
what's going on there and what the story
is and how all of these different people
cars were
might be how they're all interacting so
I figured I could answer David's
question by also using examples from
geogebra to keep Brian happy so
hopefully I'll make both of them happy
and hopefully you're also watching if
you are a hello David and Ryan thanks
your questions so the first one I'm
going to do I guess said this is from
geogebra so the graph looks as follows
we've got the usual are going to have
time on the x-axis and distance up here
of course these can be any way around
there's there's no reason they have to
look like this this is just what we did
in the video so I'm going to try and be
consistent so we've got distance on the
y-axis time on the x-axis and the graph
first I'm going to look at you get some
different colors it's gonna be there is
a blue truck which is going to do that
okay and then there's going to be
another this is gonna be a motorbike
which is in red which is going to do
that that and that right so this is
velocity six on geogebra if anyone is
currently on Jeju we're trying to figure
out what's going on so now the question
is like what's happening so this is this
was Davis question we've been given the
travel graph and we want to interpret
this and figure out what might actually
be happening here so for example let's
start with the blue line so just focus
on the blue line that's this straight
line here so let's let's ask that's
that's the audience right let's ask you
guys so I want to know if you let me
know in the chat box what do we think is
happening for the blue truck so the blue
line
what is that truck doing on our road
right so if we had our road over here
like videos for example so what is the
truck doing based on the graph
I will eventually explain if no one
else's but I won't wait yes perfect
thank you Sam blue is moving at a
constant speed exactly
so blue is just a straight line the
gradient is the same throughout well
it's me attempting to draw a straight
line and yes as Sammy say is moving
uniformly so the truck is just moving
along at a constant speed along our road
now the bike in red what is the bike
doing then if the truck is moving at a
constant speed
what is the bike doing so there's kind
of three sections to the graph we've got
something happening at the beginning
then something slightly different
because the gradient is changing and
there's something happening again at the
end it's so blue I don't know how I can
redraw a an interactive picture but we
bought a truck sort of starting here
moving at some sort of constant speed
along the graph now what's the red one
doing right exactly so thank you na and
no one's perfect the red bike he's
starting to move faster right so the
bikes going at the same speed as the
truck so happily so the bikes kind of
dying how do you draw a bike I don't
even know I was going to a circle can we
draw a bike from above so you've got a
bike and this is moving at the same
speed as the truck to start with but
then this point here it goes faster
because the curves steeper so the bike
is going to accelerate the bikes against
your might like two arrows it's going to
overtake the truck and then it's going
to move back in front of the truck and
carry on at a constant speed so the
story of the graph to answer David's
question how would you interpret these
graphs exactly for what's happening
they're moving at the same speed to
begin with then the bike the rider on
the bike has clearly decided I'm not
happy going at this speed I want to go
faster so has decided to overtake
the blue truck therefore has sped up it
passes the blue truck here at this
particular time and then the bike is
ahead of the truck gets a safe distance
ahead and then returns back to its
normal speed so this graph is basically
showing an overtaking maneuver happening
on the road so let's try another one so
I think then if you want to play with
this yourself this was velocity six on
the geogebra resource so you can click
on that and you can like see it happen
in real time instead of my terrible
pictures you can actually see these
things animation and see these things
move so let's now kind of kept my axes
look at a slightly different one well
from dimana so let's look at the
following so there's only going to be
one car this time and it's distance time
graph it's going to look like that so
now I would like you all to to have a
think about what is the car doing so I
want you to tell me the story we have a
car on a road and what I want to know
what is the car doing is it accelerating
is it overtaking is it reversing who
knows so using the graph you should be
able to tell me the full story and the
full description and how this car is
driving a lot on the road
excellent Thank You Chandana
I'm Candela turndown it I hope let's
think saying that correct probably isn't
does this mean the car reverses and it
stays in the same place and then moves
again it does well Dunning it's exactly
that the car is starting at a constant
speed driving along at this point then
some reason decides to reverse then it
stops because the graph is going flat so
I should have labeled my axes terrible
mistake so it's going flat here the
distance isn't changing and then it
decides to speed up so maybe like we can
make up a pretend story and say that the
car was driving along with let's say had
like a suitcase strapped to its roof and
then the case falls off so the car the
dryer realizes that the case is falling
off so they stop they then reverse then
they don't move whilst the driver gets
out picks up the case puts it back on
the roof and then they carry on with
their journey so you can have some fun
making up these stories actually like
these would be pretty creative exam
questions like tell you a nice beautiful
story about the loser losing a suitcase
and you have to draw the graph right so
we'll do one more of these because I
found another one for example and and I
should say the one I just did the second
one there that is velocity four on the
geogebra interactive resource so I will
also post the link to that actually I
should probably put the link to that in
the chat let me do that so if anyone
wants to have a go than they can write
okay here we go all right there is the
link to the interactive Jarrett's know
you've all got that so we did first of
all we just six that one was four and
now we look at one more so this time
it's going to look like the following
distance again on the y-axis time on the
x-axis and what's going to happen this
time is going to be a car it's gonna go
actually it's use different colors
so there's a truck in blue it's going to
be a bike let's do the bike in red again
and then there's also going to be I
think the Green was a convertible or a
sports car so we've got a sports car in
green so what is happening in this graph
you
and you won't got any ideas I'm aware
you realize there's obviously a delay
between me speaking and then you guys
seeing what actually happens right
amazing okay so the truck truck is
stopped yes and then the two cars are
moving opposite and the origin is in the
middle of the road
exactly I think we pretty much got it
right so you've got you've got your
convertible in your flight so if we draw
the road what's really happening here is
there's your truck in the middle let's
say the truck was here shall we and your
truck doesn't move because it has a flat
line so the trucks distance doesn't
change at all now the red one is going
to move the bike oops so on the wrong
side of the road showing everything on
the left because I'm in England so
you've got a red bike here which is
moving like that way and then we've got
our green convertible it's gonna be up
here moving that way so what's happening
is the truck isn't moving so let's say
the trucks broken down so this the bike
obviously wants to go round the truck
but the bike hasn't looked and hasn't
seen the convertible coming and so the
bike has moved into this Lane and then
it crashed because three of them are
staying still in the centre of the road
so they're all stuck here and there's a
big crash at the X so it's kind of like
the one we did in the video with the
ambulance so we could also if I wanted
we could then have once they've crashed
you'd have an ambulance coming in
picking everybody up and then driving
away like we had in the example the last
example we did in the video right so
thank you Ryan and thank you David
those are both questions I hope I've
addressed each of those for you so now
I've got another sort of combination of
questions so Lewis asked what would the
travel graph look like around a
racetrack which i think is a great
question so I'm going to address that
one and that also fits in with
a question from pratik who asked what
does a travel graph look like when the
speed isn't constant so I'm going to
show you the travel graph for a lap
around a racetrack and that will include
parts where the speed isn't constant so
I can do both questions together so I'm
going to do a make made-up race track
now so it's gonna draw something random
gonna chicane I'm gonna kind of have a
loop there and I come around right this
is my made-up race circuit let's call it
the Oxford racetrack and you're gonna
start here so this is the start of the
lap and we're going to move in that
direction
and now what we want to do is think
about what might a travel graph look
like if we were to drive around this
circuit doing a lap so we're going to
need our graph we will do distance on
the y axis again time on the x axis okay
now at the very beginning let's suppose
that the race is just starting so at the
very start we're going to be still for a
short period of time so we're going to
be flat down here and then the green
lights are going to come on and we're
going to start the race so we begin by
accelerating now before on our graphs we
only show the constant speed and so that
was represented by a straight line but
if there's an acceleration what's
happening is you're starting here from
zero speed and then you're gradually
getting faster and faster and faster so
there's like a gradual change a gradual
increase in your speed so you don't just
suddenly go from zero to some angle some
speed
you have to get there gradually so you
get a curve rather than a straight line
so what you kind of see is something
like this so you have this curve shape
as we start to speed up and then let's
suppose we get to top speed before we
get to the corner so we've reached our
top speed which is going to be this line
here so we accelerate we reach top speed
and now we're approaching the corner so
the first corner we're going to have to
slow down and this is actually quite a
sharp corner it's like it's a full new
turn so we're going to slow down quite a
bit when we go around this corner so
this again like we sped up at the start
gradually we're going to gradually slow
down so this will become a bit flatter
now it won't go completely flat because
we're still moving the car is not going
to actually stop as we go around the
corner we're going to keep moving a
little bit hello a human being 22 so
we're going to not start but we've
slowed down so now we start to go a bit
flatter and we go around the corner and
as we leave the corner sort of here
we're going to speed up again so we
speed up a little bit and then we
approach the corner again so we're gonna
have the same behavior as we saw here
the slow down and then the speed up as
we leave the corner so we're gonna
flatten off a bit and then speed up
again as we leave the corner so if I
sort of try and match up the graph with
the circuit we've got this corner here
is this slow down and speed up section
that this little sort of humped shape
like s shape almost and then we have the
second corner which is there and now
we're going to have again the same thing
the same slow down deceleration and
acceleration okay and moving more wire
so this will slow down a little bit and
then we speed up so again the same kind
of bump in our curve
and that's gonna be third corner which
is gonna be this one now we're going to
again accelerate and reach our constant
speeds so that's gonna be our straight
line going at our top speed and now
we're approaching another corner but
this is less sharp so these first three
were all new beds so they were really
quite slow so here we're gonna have to
brake a little bit but you know you're
gonna take this at sort of 75 percent
speed let's say it's not really that
sharp of a corner so what we're going to
do is going to slow down a little bit
but then kind of take that through at 75
percent speed and then as we come out of
the corner we're going to probably still
be going about sort of 75 percent speed
until we sort of get down here when we
start to really accelerate again so
there's going to be a decent chunk when
we're going
not quite top speed but quite fast and
then we're going to accelerate running
out for hug space and then we're going
to accelerate the top speed and this is
a really gentle corner so we're going to
just go at the same constant top speed
all the way back until we cross the
finish line so the last part if I could
draw it let's just pretend it continues
down here we'll just be top speed in a
big straight line because we have this
nice gentle final corner so if I redraw
that so that all fits on the graph and
just do that again so that we can see
the full lap as we go around the circuit
so this is time right so we had we were
flat then we accelerated so it's the
curve then we had our first corner so we
said that was this sort of bump shape
then we had our second bump shape then
we had our third bump shape then we went
to sort of a little bit slower than 75%
speed
and then we finished in a steep part
okay so we've got first corner first
u-turn second u-turn at third u-turn
this is like a fast corner and then this
is the home street so again going back
to the first question I looked at and
David's question which was asking can
you always interpret the the treble
graph to see what's happening so if we
didn't have the circuit so if I just
didn't show you the racetrack given this
graph you can still figure out what the
racetrack must look like
so just given the particular graph so
you know there's a deceleration followed
by an acceleration so there's a corner
there's another corner where there's a
bump there's another corner here as
we've seen as a slightly faster corner
and then there's the home street so you
can figure out all of these things
without actually knowing what the
racetrack looks like which is quite neat
alright so that was concentrating on
Lewis's question which was saying what
does a travel graph look like for a
racetrack but I also mentioned that
pratik had asked about what happens when
we have non constant speeds when we've
got acceleration happening so what I
thought so I've shown some examples
there of accelerated in deceleration
when we get this smooth curve so what I
thought would be useful was to sort of
talk through properly how we define the
gradient of a curve rather than just a
straight line so I will rub this off and
then we will get stuck into that and
that'll be the final question that I've
got sort of prepared and then we'll open
it up to any questions in the chat
right then so we'll start by looking at
this is going to be Usain Bolt's so like
we did in the video like Bobby did this
is you say bolts hundred meters world
record so oh we've got the graph as
follows we've got this is distance again
this will be time so we know his world
record is I think it's nine point five
eight someone I'm sure can correct me if
that's wrong and he's going 100 meters
now so we got to get to this point here
now the graph Bobby showed us was the
very very beginning and then there was
an acceleration as he started to speed
up then there was this period in the
middle of sort of constant speed and
then towards the end we saw a little bit
of a tail off in the speed so it's not
quite as flat as I've drawn but it's
sort of certainly slowing down at the
end so again it's kind of like a flat S
shape almost now if you watch the video
I released earlier today which was Bobby
explaining this graph in more detail he
actually told us that this section in
the middle between 30 and about this
tall Zn is about 70 meters so this
section in the middle is where the
sprinters are really powering through so
this is where they are sort of a
acceleration at the beginning they build
up their pace then they power through at
their absolute maximum top speed which i
think is about 26 miles an hour or so
for Usain Bolt
credibly quick and then you start to
slow down a little bit towards the end
for those last thirty meters now if we
want so this would be an example of
distance time graph where there's a non
constant speed now if you want to know
the speed certain points in this graph
so if we want to know the speed in the
middle section where the Sprinter is at
their top speed and is powering through
then you basically just need to know the
gradient of this straight line because
this is approximately a straight line in
the middle they can maintain this top
speed for about the middle forty meters
so here all you do is you just figure
out you turn this into a triangle and
then I think the method that you're
possibly taught at school is you measure
these two Y values
these two x1 x2 values and then you can
say that the gradient is equal to the
change in Y so y2 minus y1 divided by
the change in X and so hopefully you
recognize this formula this tells you
the gradient of a straight line and you
have these two points by 2 y1 x1 x2 like
oh Jordan the graph now this works for
this middle section this is completely
true and this will give you the maximum
top speed there which as I said I think
is about 26 miles an hour for Usain Bolt
but now what we might want to know is
well what is the the speed here let's do
a different color might want to know
what is the speed down here at this
point of the graph and now this isn't as
easy because this isn't a straight line
so we can't really use our straight line
triangle trick so what we have to do is
as follows we have to I'm going to start
by drawing a bigger graph let's do that
so put over here
so what something it looks like that so
we've kind of got so this start piece
kind of looks like this I want to know
what's happening in this middle so I can
see somebody just said we do the tangent
which is completely correct well done so
by the tangent what we do is you
basically you take your ruler or your
straightedge whatever it is and you draw
a line here just touching the graph so
again this is something Bobby mentioned
in the video you draw a line just about
touching the graph at this point so that
the angle on both sides is about the
same so we're making an estimate but
it's pretty accurate right you want to
know the gradient here you draw your
straight line now you've got your
straight line and so you can go back and
do your triangle method so you would
just then draw in your triangle like so
and then you can work out the gradient
using this formula right and now gives
you a very very good estimate of the
gradient at that particular point but if
we want to know this exactly so we want
you know we're mathematicians we don't
want to guess things you want the exact
answer to get the exact answer you need
to use a differentiation and it I don't
know if you've studied this yet but
certainly isn't studied a GCSE level
which is what these are primarily
pitched at but it kind of works in the
same way as the gradient formula and I'm
going to convince you sort of how that
works now so if I first of all let's rub
off this graph cuz we're just focusing
on that first part now to try and get
the gradient there so and I should also
mention even if you have Sony
differentiation I will hopefully present
it to you in a slightly different way
and explain why it works so what we've
got is the following I'm going to
I'm just going to focus on this curved
part of the graph this acceleration at
the beginning so what we can do is
through a really big picture of it and
then I'm going to call this is going to
be y equals f of X so my variable down
here of course is X and I'm just saying
that on my y-axis I'm plotting a
function of X that's all this notation
means so I've got f of X and I have X
now if we then want to know the gradient
at this point let's say here so we want
to know the speed which is equal to the
gradient of the graph at this point so
what we do is kind of try and follow our
triangle method so you can say right
well if I extend a little bit that way
just make this a bigger axis so if I
just draw a straight line here and do
this in red actually draw my horizontal
line and then I can then draw up a
vertical line until I get to my graph
and now if I join these two points
together this line here is pretty close
to the white line it's not exact for now
it's sort of what we were doing very
similar to what we were doing over here
we're taking an estimate we're just
drawing a line that looks very similar
to the slope of our white line and we're
going to try and work out the gradient
of that line so if we were doing that so
this value here is at the point let's
call it X and then this point here is
going to be X plus some number H we
don't know what H is we don't really
care it's some little extension across
right so this is x1 and this is x2
based on our notation that we've used
therefore m and then if I then go across
to here this point so our value is X and
this is given by y equals f of X so here
the value is f of X 1 and then here y is
equal to f of X 2 so now if we plug
these into our formula we get that our
estimated for the gradient here is going
to be f of X 2 so this one remember here
this is y 2 and this is y 1 again for
our formula so we've got f of x2 minus F
of x1 divided by x2 minus x1 so this is
exactly the same formula as we've got in
this equation here but I just expressed
it in terms instead of just using
instead of using x1 x2 y1 and y2 we
actually know y2 is f of X 2 and y 1 is
f of X 1 because we're at this point
which is still on our curve so we're now
back to a formula that we are familiar
with that will give us an estimate it's
going to be sort of accurate but not
perfect now what can I do to my diagram
here to make this estimate better
that's the question so I'll give you a
bit of time to think about that so we
have this
particular estimate at the moment based
on this picture and what I want to know
is how can we make this red line even
closer to our white line because we want
to know the gradient at this point
exactly well we are going to
differentiate some but we're trying to
get there from the from the geometry so
what can I change about my picture to
make it a little bit better
there we go awesome right gr has said
move the points closer that is exactly
what we want to do so if instead of
going across to this point I had just
gone across to here and then gone up so
now the blue triangle and then I draw my
straight line this blue triangle is much
closer to the white line than the red
triangle so the blue one is much much
better it's a better estimate so instead
of doing X plus our original one was
here which is X plus h1 now we're at
this point which is going to be X plus h
2 where H 2 is smaller than X 1 and you
can we can keep repeating this process
so if we were to go again my diagram is
going to probably get very unclear now
but if we were to go again in green like
that the green triangle right in the
center is now even closer to the
gradient and we can just keep doing this
so what we're doing is we're getting
closer and closer to our point here now
to think about what that means just
remove this one so we start
started with X 2 equal to X plus h 1 and
X 1 equal to X so if I substitute those
into this formula this is actually equal
to f of X plus h minus f of X divided by
X plus h minus X so all I've done here
is took the fact that X 1 was just X and
X 2 was X plus h X plus h 1 wasn't it so
it was H 1 now that's going to simplify
a little bit
so our gradient M is in fact going to be
f of X plus h 1 minus f of X divided by
these X's will cancel and we have a H 1
on the bottom so what happens now when
we consider the blue triangle which we
call H 2 so we have the same formula so
M let's call it M 2 this will be M 1 so
M 2 f of X plus h 2 minus f of X divided
by H 2 and this remember is a better
approximation than M 1 so what do we
have to do to this particular formula to
make this the like the most perfect
approximation that we can get so H 2 is
less than H 1 so we want to then take H
3 less than H 2 H 4 less than H 3 and
we're going to keep decreasing this
horizontal distance so we get closer and
closer to X so we're going to have to
take a limit and what number will we end
up with for H
awesome H will tend to zero perfect now
the reason this is written as H arrow
zero
yes exactly sam infinitely small smaller
and smaller so the reason we write it is
tending to zero is because we cannot let
H equal zero because then we're dividing
by zero and we can never ever divide by
zero right you have to take a limit as
you go to zero you cannot just plug in
Haiti so what we actually want to do and
this is going to be our final formula is
we can say I just call that H I remember
this is motivated entirely by our
picture just from the geometry we're
saying that the gradient M is equal to
the limit as H tends to 0 of f of X plus
h minus f of X over H where you take the
limit of that entire thing and that is
the definition of differentiation that's
exactly how you calculate the derivative
of a function so let's go ahead and do
that so we we started by considering
triangles and then we realize that if we
make this point closer and closer to X
we get a better and better approximation
for the gradient and so if we actually
take it at X itself we get the exact
answer so when we do that we get this
formula up here so let's try and apply
it to some functions so the simplest
function I can think of is going to be y
equals x squared we're going to consider
a parabola right so if I say f of X
equals x squared my graph is something
like that and we want to know the
gradient
at some point here X want to know the
gradient there now we want to use our
formula so we know that the gradient is
equal to f of X plus h so all you do is
you take your X and replace it by X plus
h so this is X plus h squared minus f of
X where f of X is x squared and then we
divide by H and I forgot to write that
we're taking the limit and equals the
limit H goes to 0 this right so we don't
worry about the limit for now I'm going
to just leave that there
I'm going to calculate what's happening
in this bracket so if I expand out this
bracket this will give me x squared plus
2xh minus H no whoops minus 2x hate No
they're all pluses don't know why I keep
writing minuses x squared plus 2xh plus
h squared so I expand out this bracket
and so what I've now got is the limit H
goes to 0 of x squared plus 2h X plus h
squared minus x squared all over H now
the x squared is going to cancel we've
got a plus x squared and a minus x
squared so they disappear and then I've
also now I've got H on the Bossip but
I've got a hate on the top and a heap
squared here so they cancel and so what
I'm now left with is limit as H goes to
0 of 2 X plus h that's it the H is
disappeared from the denominator because
it's cancelled with the H's on top so
now
I just take the limit now I can actually
just plug in H equals zero because
there's no H on the bottom so I'm no
longer dividing by zero it's completely
safe I can just plug in H equals nought
and my final answer is 2x and 2x is of
course the derivative of x squared so
this is equal to F prime of X and this
is also equal to our gradient M so
that's an example with an actual
function and I hope that by showing you
the geometry of where that came from you
can see why this formula works and now
we can use it so here we're using it to
calculate gradients but to go back to
the initial purpose of why we wanted to
do this remember using this formula up
here at any point on the curve okay
you're very welcome salt on how many I
made right I'm gonna rub this off and
then I'm gonna open it up for any other
questions we have in the chat so if you
want to ask questions it can be based on
what we just did if you want me to do
another example
give me another function I'll happily do
that or if you've got some other
questions that's also fine
okay what do you get if you integrate a
distance time graph
nice question Sam let's have a think
shall we alright so let's take a simple
one to start with so if we had a
constant speed so this is distance this
is time and let's just say this was y
equals Alex right so where that would be
going we're going one way with one X so
we're going at one let's say one meter
per second so our speed is one meter per
second on meter a second because this is
time in seconds and this is distance in
meters all right
so if we want to now integrate this then
if you think about geometrically what
does an integral mean then it's
basically calculating this area right so
an integral one interpretation of an
integral is like the derivative is the
gradient of your curve the integral
gives you the area underneath your curve
now so what we gonna get when we
integrate that does it make anything
sensible to integrate I'm not sure it
has a physical meaning but if we were
to integrate the distance let me think
about this
so we're saying we want to integrate Y
respect to X so that's saying we want to
integrate the distance with respect to
time I tempted to say it doesn't have a
physical meaning so geometrically it's
the area under the curve but in terms of
like is that a physical quantity I don't
think it has a physical quantity by just
integrating distance with respect to
time so I'm afraid I was hoping that was
going to turn into something interesting
I've never thought about integrating a
distance time graph so I suppose the
answer would be it gives you the area
underneath your graph but that doesn't
really have a physical interpretation
all right we've got any other questions
thank you blood for answering the
question about continuity we're paying
attention in analysis I see is there a
geometric interpretation for the
integral like the one I just did for
differentiation 100% all right let's try
that
okay so integrating as I just mentioned
is working out the area underneath the
curve so suppose we have again f of X
this is going to be X so let's think
about this if I do let's do the same
example y equals x which is our f of X
right so if you wanted to know the area
under this curve actually I can't maybe
do a straight line because we all wheel
well we can do this one actually because
you all know I hope what this should be
right so if Y is equal to X then this is
let's call this a point what can this be
this can be at B and so then this one up
here y is equal to that so Y is B at
this point as well so then what's the
area underneath my curve here so just
you metrically you can hopefully just
tell me what the area should be under
that curve based on the shape
B squared over 2 thank you Yolo right so
it's just B squared over 2 it's the area
of a triangle triangle area is B squared
over 2 so and then if we had integrated
our function whether or not you know you
know how to integrate well let's suppose
you do know how to integrate the
integral of x DX between 0 and B is
equal to 1/2 x squared between 0 and B
so that's B squared over 2 so if you
don't know what I'm talking about these
integrals don't worry but if you do know
how to integrate you'll know that if you
do the integral formula you get B
squared over 2 and from the triangle by
geometry we get B squared over 2 so
again it's a simple example but it shows
us that you know the integral is
calculating the area like we think now
let's try something a bit trickier so so
let's try so what I'm going to do now is
take a general function y equals f of X
this is going to be X and we're going to
suppose that it looks something like
that
all right so it's kind of like a cause
or a sign some kind of curve now as a
first approximation we want to know the
exact we're in the exact area between
these two points right so between 0 and
let's call this a and then we're going
to say that at this point this is going
to be the point B right so Y is equal to
B when X is a so now if we want to know
this area our first approximation like
when we were trying to work with
gradients we drew a triangle and then
use our knowledge of how to calculate
the gradient of a straight line
so if we just say well it kind of looks
like a rectangle as a starting point so
we've got this big rectangle which has
area a B so if I say rectangle area
equals a times B so that's our first
estimate for the area it's not very
accurate because we can see that there
are some bits you know there's more
above the line than there is below the
line so it's definitely where we are
under estimating the area but it's the
first attempt now what did we do last
time to make our estimate more accurate
we considered h1 and h2 and how did we
modify them to make our second estimate
better
perfect Thank You jr. we move them
closer so we can do the same here so
rather than taking a rectangle as the
whole thing we could have instead said
well if I take it as this rectangle here
plus this rectangle here Plus this last
bit so that would be the same one right
so then you go under there okay so now
I've drawn a slightly different estimate
so then you could calculate the area of
this one right area one which is a
rectangle area two for this rectangle
and then area three okay turns out that
would actually be a slightly smart
because of how I've drawn them it isn't
exactly ideal so let's split this one up
and make it better
let's do suppose we went to let's do
that and then let's do the last one
there so this is area 4 and this is very
very so now we've just got four
rectangles and we can reasonably
straight forwards work out those areas
so if we said this was it at say over
four suppose that was a over - that was
three over four okay
so you split it up into four equal parts
and now each of them gives you I am the
guy for numberphile yes it then gives
you the total area of four rectangles
all added together so we've got four
rectangles and that's going to be well
who knows we get some answer and it's
slightly better right so we've improved
our estimate instead of having one giant
rectangle thanks.thanks edge you ninja
so instead of having one giant rectangle
we've split it up now into four smaller
rectangles and we've got a better answer
so what do we do next to get
even better approximation for the area
you
exactly make more rectangles so we want
to make the rectangles even smaller so
the moment I've made them all 1/4 of the
distance so if I then made them all 1/8
of the distance and went up to here and
then this one up to here and then split
this one in half split this one in half
and that one and then split this one in
half so we split them all up and what
we're doing is I rub this well I don't
need that anymore do I
so what we're doing is we're making them
smaller and smaller and the area at each
step is equal to the width which is from
how I've drawn it let's say H over N and
then it's multiplied by the height so
the height this is between naught and a
over 8 and I'm taking the height here to
be y equals F at the point a over 8 so
it's H over N times the height which is
F at that point at H over N so that
would give me the the rectangle at one
particular actually I'll use a
considering a wrote a so this is
true and we've done an example when N
equals 8
let me just think about how I want to do
this so it's that times capital N and
then right I'm gonna rewrite this up
make it clear so what we've got is the
area of the first one is equal to naught
to a over eight so that's a over eight
times the height which is F and a over
eight and then we are done the area of
the second rectangle so that's going to
be between a over four and a over eight
so 1/4 minus 1/8 gives us 1/8 so this
now gives us a over eight is the width
and the height is f at a over four times
F over 4 and then the next one is going
to have a width of a over 8 times F at a
over to know a at 3/8 and then this
carries on all the way up until the last
one so there are eight different terms
in this sum so what we can do is we can
simplify it and write it as one big sum
so this is just equal to a over eight
times the sum from as if I write that as
1/8 and that was a to sum of K a over 8
where k is equal to 1 up to 8 okay so we
now
this formula for our area when we use 8
correct angles now if I went back and
change this to 16 rectangles I divided
them all in half again then now what
we're going to do is replace the 8 by 16
because they're all half smaller this
gets replaced by 16 and this number on
the top gets replaced by 16 so if we're
trying to write down a general formula
for this we're going to keep making
these smaller and smaller and smaller so
if we write down a general formula
wherever I've just replaced an 8 with a
16 let's call that some number n right
and then we're going to let n get larger
and larger and larger
because if let if we let this number we
started with it at 2 then 4 then 8 then
16 and we got a better and better
approximation for the area by making it
into thinner and thinner strips so if we
do the same so I'll keep the 1 at the
bottom so let the 1 at the bottom for
your reference so what we've got now is
the area is equal to a over N times the
sum from k equals 1 to N of K a and like
that and now as I just hinted at we want
to let n get larger and larger and
larger and so what we want to do is let
n go to infinity because if n goes to
infinity it's getting bigger and bigger
and bigger what we're doing n is the
number of strips so as we increase n
we're dividing this up into smaller and
smaller strips and so we get a better
and better approximation for the area
under the curve so all we're doing are
adding up loads of really really thin
rectangles so if we now let n go to
infinity so the area
equal to the limit as M infinity oh this
and that is your formula for an integral
so we change the notation a little bit
when we do the integral sign but it's
basically telling you exactly that so
this is if you now take a function you
can plug this in oh this is f of that my
apologies
so if you change your function f so here
I did this sort of wave like sign
function so if you change your formula
for f you then just change in here so
you could do this for example with x
squared if you want and convince
yourself you get 1/3 X cubed coming out
of your formula these ones are a bit
harder than the differentiation so the
first one I talked through was
differentiation for first principles and
this would be integration from first
principles the differentiation ones are
a bit easier so if you want practice
with this kind of thing
try the differentiation one from sort of
20 minutes ago half an hour ago in the
stream try some of those questions with
different functions F and then if you
want to move on to the integral one you
can try it with this formula and it
should work right so that's about one
hour and three minutes it's a perfect
time to stop so thank you again everyone
for joining me I hope you've met more
about travel graphs I hope you've
learned a lot about differentiation and
integration I was not expecting to do a
a beginners course calculus but that's
what we've ended up doing but thank you
for suggesting the questions ed you
ninja I'm doing this every Friday at 4
o'clock so there is a schedule and the
same for everybody else I'll be back in
another week 4 o'clock UK time doing
this in the meantime if you want to keep
sending me questions that's absolutely
fine so the main focus of these videos
is going hello Brazil the main focus of
these videos is going to be on the video
as I'm releasing on the Monday so next
Monday the ton rocks mass appeal video
is looking at the volume of 3d shapes
so cuboids and spheres and prisms and
various things so volume of 3d shapes
that video will come out on Monday then
Bobby and Susan from mass appeal will
answer your questions on Thursday so
make sure you written your questions in
the comments or posted them to me on
social media by Wednesday to give them
chance to prepare their answers and then
I'll be live next Friday 4 p.m. UK time
so again I'll start with questions based
on 3d shapes and based on volumes and
then if you have other questions I'll
take them in the live chat but if you
also have questions now that you really
want to ask so I know someone's
mentioned they have a question if you
put it in the comments
then I'll note it down and I'll start
with that question
also next week ok right
also so I'll see you all in a week
thanks again ok